All right.
So now that we've seen what can go wrong when we try to do even simple, precise calculations with the
primitive floating point numeric types such as float and double, you should be wondering how do we
get around this?
And thankfully, the Java gods have seen fit to bless us with a solution to this problem.
So before I explain exhaustively how this solution works?
Let me just introduce you to it by showing you how we can fix this problem that we just saw earlier
where we tried to subtract one float or double from another float or double, and we got really weird
results.
So we'll do the same program again.
In fact, we'll just do it in line here right afterwards, and we'll do a printout of this and then
we'll do a printout with the other solution.
So the solution is that Java gives us a class called Big Decimal, and it's called Big Decimal because
it allows us to do decimal math with a whole lot of precision.
Thus, the big part.
So what this is, though, it's a class, it's not a primitive.
So right now, with the end float double byte, all of these things, what we've been dealing with are
called primitives.
They are fundamental data types built into Java, which are not classes, OK, but Big Decimal is an
actual class.
And so we have to create instances of it using the new operator.
Although we have seen one or two classes that we do not use the new operator for instantiating, such
as with the regular expressions, pattern and matter.
But with this one, it would go back to the normal way of just using the new operator.
So let's let's take a look at how to use this.
So we'll create a couple of additional variables, but now they're data type will not be float or double.
It will be big decimal.
And I don't know if you saw that I did it kind of instinctively.
But while the ADP was helping me out there, I hit enter, which then caused the big decimal package
to be imported.
Let me do that again, because some of you won't intuitively do it that way and you'll you'll have problems.
So if you type out big decimal all the way, which you shouldn't do, you can just type B, you're Big
D or whatever, and then just choose it from this list here.
So if you get to this point that you're seeing the list, then you can just selected or hit enter,
and that will cause it to be imported like so now my line one is Java Dot Math that big decimal?
OK, Big Decimal.
And I'll call this number a because I already used number one on.
I guess I could do num num three, I suppose num three.
Yeah, that's fine.
All right.
New Big Decimal Now Big Decimal has a constructor that takes a lot of different data types.
However, let me emphasize the most important and preferred way to instantiate a big decimal is actually
by using a string.
Let me show you what that looks like.
So up here on Line seven, we created a float with a value of two point one five.
Let's just do the same thing with the big decimal.
However, the way to do that is to just make a string.
Two point one five and then close that and semicolon.
Now that might look a little weird to you that we are intentionally specifying a number inside of a
string.
But the reason we're doing this is because we want Big Decimal to be 100 percent accurate in representing
whatever it is that we are specifying.
And if we were to use a primitive numeric type such as float or double, which we could do.
The problem is that as soon as we use that float or double type, we introduced the rounding issues
or we have the potential to introduce the rounding issues because the computer has to immediately take
that two point one five and put it into a float or a double or whatever.
Right.
And we've already seen how the rounding issues can occur with that because of the binary representation
of the bits and all.
So to avoid that completely, the best thing to do is to simply use a string.
And then you are 100 percent telling the decimal exactly what you meant and not allowing some other
data type to interpret it.
All right.
So there's a two point one five, and then we'll make another one.
We'll call this number four.
Same deal.
And this one will be a one point one zero.
All right.
Oh, sorry, and I want this print line to be up here.
Did you see how I move that with the option shift up arrow or alt shift up arrow for Windows and Linux?
All right.
So now I will do a shift in here to make a new line and I will create another System.out.println line.
Now I'll do the same math that I did before, however, because these two variables NUM three and four
are not primitives.
I cannot do something like, what did I do before NUM three minus NUM four?
I can't do that.
You see that I get an error there.
These math operators can only operate ultimately on primitives, and so they can't work with big decimal.
However, since Big Decimal is a class, it has methods on it and it has methods to handle all of the
typical mass operations that we would want.
So instead of using the minus sign operator, we can actually use a method on the decimal class, such
as subtract, just like so.
And then the input for this method will be our other value in this case.
NUM four No decides to put another parentheses there to close the subtract method and then the last
parentheses, which was to close the print line.
All right, so now let's run this and see what we get, so we'll we'll print out the old one with float
and then the new one with big decimal.
All right.
So there's the old one, which was one point zero five zero zero zero zero zero one, and now we get
a perfect one point zero five with big decimal.
So the moral of the story is any time you need to do absolutely any money calculations, you have to
use big decimal.
End of story.
Don't even don't even think about it.
OK.
And then for other types of calculations such as scientific and engineering, depending on the level
of precision or accuracy you require, you may strongly want to consider using big decimal there.
Now, you may be wondering well, since float and double have been shown to give strange or erroneous,
they're not really strange.
They're predictable but unintended results, depending on what calculations you're asking them to do.
Why bother using those at all?
And that's a great question.
The reason why you may want to prefer using float double and all of the primitive number types in general
is because they are blazingly fast.
There is a cost to having the level of accuracy that we get with Big Decimal, and by the way, Big
Decimal has a cousin called Big Integer, which is just a huge integer like even bigger than the long
that we already have seen.
So big decimal and big integer store their data a little differently, and they go through a few operations
to do so.
And they are capable of growing to be as big as you may need them to be to support whatever values you're
trying to calculate on.
That comes at a fairly significant cost, though.
So by default, you should prefer to use the primitive number types when you know you can get away with
it.
OK.
It is only when you absolutely must have the high degree of accuracy, such as with financial calculations
that you must switch to using big decimal or big integer.
OK, so in the next lesson, we'll start looking at more of what you can actually do with big decimal.
It has a lot of similar operations in the form of methods on it that the math class has.
And so we'll just take a look at how to use it and we'll see in the next one.